Motivation: 

We evaluate the current state of functional data-parallel languages,
through the implementation of two option pricing algorithms in the
examined languages. Specifically, we implement a lattice based
binomial option pricer, the least-squares Monte Carlo algorithm, and
several versions of Sobol sequence generators, a quasi-random number
generator applicable for Monte Carlo integration.

Motivated by our attempts at implementing these algorithms, we
identify that both Nikola, Accelerate and Repa lack support for
iterative array construction, and suggest the addition of new
constructs, and give several possible implementation strategies.

We demonstrate a lack of composability in the current languages, which
makes library development somewhat infeasible, as the library user
would have to restructure the library depending on how it is used, or
the library writer will have to provide several versions of the same
exported function.

The problem occurs when ..., ... this is because of limitations
imposed in these languages, that forbid nested array operations.

We percieve the prohibition of nested array operations, as the largest
obstacle against ... and programmer adoption and we believe that the
compilation of nested data-parallel languages should be adressed
rather than bypass the issue entirely.

We suggest an alternative approach

 - mention vectorisation

 - At vi har et forslag til at l√∏se det



Old-abstract
-------------

We explore the state of current functional data-parallel programming
languages targeting GPUs, by means of evaluating a set of option
pricing algorithms, namely the binomial option pricing algorithm and
the least squares Monte Carlo approach introduced by Longstaff and
Schwartz, as well as related algorithms employed in Monte Carlo
integration.

Among the surveyed languages we find both Nikola and Accelerate
constrained by their expressiveness due to restrictions of the target
platform.

We improve on the limitations we have found and the improvements take
the form of additional primitive constructs for iterative array
construction and a new suggested /cursor/ for marking the division
between sequential and parallel code, much inspired by constructs
found in Repa.

We believe that there is much promise in continuing work on our
suggestion, but we were unable to finish implementing and testing the
extensions due to project time constraints. We give an analysis of
what practical work remains.
